Chapter 16
A Dialogic Approach to Technology-Enhanced Education for the Global Knowledge Society

Rupert Wegerif and Nasser Mansour

The Idea of the Knowledge Society

The claim that education needs to respond to the challenge of the emerging global knowledge society is now the common sense position in almost every government educational policy review (Jacoby, 2007). While we may not be surprised that relatively economically advanced countries like the UK, Germany, and the EU shape education policies to respond to the knowledge society e.g (European Council, 2000), Jacoby finds the same references to the need to compete in the knowledge society-shaping education policy in less-developed countries such as Bangladesh and Namibia. The interesting implication Jacoby draws from this is that the idea of the knowledge society now serves as a vision of a global future that is leading to a convergence of education policies. Whether grounded on an empirical analysis of changes in the economy or motivated by a shared vision of a global networked future, the idea that we are moving into a knowledge society now raises challenges for educational theories and educational practice and shapes educational policy across the world.
The basic idea behind the knowledge society is that we are in the midst of a new economic revolution in which the nature of work is shifting from the industrial stage dominated by the manufacture and exchange of physical goods towards the post-industrial “knowledge age” dominated by the manufacture and exchange of knowledge and ideas in a global context (Drucker, 1969; Bell, 1999; UNESCO, 2005). Manuel Castells, one of the most quoted commentators on the impact of new technology on society, extends Daniel Bell’s earlier analysis of this shift in the economy and in society by bringing out the extent to which it is dependent on new information and communications technology. In his trilogy The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture he analyses data on current trends to argue that there is a convergence towards a new form of social organization which he calls “the Network Society” defining this as “a society where the key social structures and activities are organized around electronically processed information networks” (Castells, 2001).

Thinking Skills for the Knowledge Age

Many have argued that education needs to respond to the accelerating rate of technological and social change associated with the knowledge age and globalisation. In particular a need is seen for more adaptability or “learning to learn” throughout the lifespan (e.g., Levin & Rumberger, 1995; Quisumbing, 2005). Castells supports this trend in arguing that this shift in the social economy “calls into question the entire education system developed during the industrial era” and demands that we develop a new pedagogy (Castells, 2001, p. 278). In the UK the influential Leitch report (2006) extrapolated the same trends to argue that to compete successfully in the global economy of the knowledge age we need to teach more Higher Order generic skills. The Leitch report defines these as “Level 4” skills but says little about their specific nature beyond the fact that they are associated with degree level qualifications. Bernie Trilling, head of Oracle Education, goes further and defines the skills we need for the knowledge age as the Seven Cs (see Table 16.1).

Table 16.1 Skills for the knowledge age as the Seven Cs

Seven Cs — Component skills

- Critical thinking and doing — Problem solving, research, analysis, project management, etc
- Creativity — New knowledge creation, “Best Fit” design solutions, artful storytelling, etc
- Collaboration — Cooperation, compromise, consensus, community-building, etc
- Cross-cultural understanding — Across diverse ethnic, knowledge and organisational cultures
- Communication — Crafting messages and using media effectively
- Computing — Effective use of electronic information and knowledge tools
- Career and learning self-reliance — Managing change, lifelong learning and career redefinition

(From Trilling & Hood, 2001)

While this is just one list it is reasonably representative of the range of lists articulating the skills needed to survive and thrive in the knowledge age (e.g., Bruns, 2007). With their focus on creative and critical thinking as well as on learning to learn, these lists are clearly a development in the same tradition as the teaching thinking skills movement, offering a new version of the sort of thinking that we should value and ought to teach more of because there is not enough of it about. However they do not entirely fit the cognitive assumptions that lie behind many more traditional approaches to teaching thinking. It is the argument of this chapter that the idea of the knowledge age and the kinds of skills, habits, and dispositions associated with it requires that we need to re-conceptualise what we mean by education and particularly education for higher order thinking skills.

A Dialogic Reconceptualisation of “Higher Order Thinking Skills”

Bakhtin, the main source of contemporary dialogic theory, is sometimes referred to in support of the claim that cognition is socially situated because for Bakhtin cognition occurs within dialogues in which all utterances are spoken by someone and have a specific addressee. However, it is interesting that for Bakhtin dialogic was also about escaping from what he referred to dismissively “the narrow space of small time” (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 167). He writes that:
In order to understand it is immensely important for the person who understands to be located outside the object of his or her creative understanding – in time, in space, in culture (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 7)

Utterances in a dialogue, he pointed out, are never only directed at a specific addressee but also at a superaddressee, the ideal of a third party to the dialogue who has a capacity to understand what is really meant by the utterance even when the specific addressee cannot understand it due perhaps to his or her limitations (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 126). The superaddressee evokes for some the idea of God as a person who understands everything, but it is also similar to the ideal of an unsituated universal perspective aspired to by science and often referred to as a “God’s eye point of view”. This ideal of an unsituated perspective is understood by Bakhtin not as a real unsituated perspective but as a projection out of situated dialogues. The superaddressee mechanism in dialogues whereby every dialogue generates a “third” or “witness” position can help us to understand how dialogues teach thinking through an expansion of awareness. It is only by externalizing my thoughts to you on paper now, for instance, that I am able myself to see them clearly, question them, and move beyond them.
The phrase “Higher Order Thinking” originated in a distinction made between lower order skills such as remembering and higher order skills such as evaluating (Bloom, 1956). The sort of distinction being made by Bloom is suspect, but the phrase “Higher Order” is still useful to distinguish distinctively human creative thinking from the kind of “cognition” which has been ascribed to animals and to machines. The essential dialogicality of normal human thinking is increasingly pointed to by developmental psychology as a contrast to the more algorithmic cognition found in psychopathologies such as autism and in non-human contexts (e.g., Hobson, 2002; Tomasello et al., 2005).
The potential relevance of engagement in dialogue as shared enquiry to the tradition of teaching higher order thinking is evident if we adopt Resnick’s definition of higher order thinking. Resnick chaired a US government commission into the teaching of thinking skills which took evidence from many practitioners and other experts. Her main conclusion was that:
Thinking skills resist the precise forms of definition we have come to associate with the setting of specified objectives for schooling. Nevertheless, it is relatively easy to list some key features of higher order thinking. When we do this, we become aware that, although we cannot define it exactly, we can recognize higher order thinking when it occurs

The features that she then goes on to list are all characteristic of the kind of thinking found in complex real dialogues, for example:

• Higher order thinking is non-algorithmic. That is, the path of action is not fully specified in advance. Higher order thinking tends to be complex. The total path is not “visible” (mentally speaking) from any single vantage point.
• Higher order thinking often yields multiple solutions, each with costs and benefits, rather than unique solutions.
• Higher order thinking involves nuanced judgment and interpretation.
• Higher order thinking involves the application of multiple criteria, which sometimes conflict with one another.
• Higher order thinking often involves uncertainty. Not everything that bears on the task at hand is known (Resnick, 1987).

Although Resnick was conceptualising these as individual skills they are all evidently the kind of skills found in a complex open-ended dialogue (where a dialogue is defined with Bakhtin as a “shared inquiry” 1986, p. 168). Research findings on the effectiveness of teaching general thinking skills programmes suggest that the depth of dialogic engagement is relevant to evidence of learning that supports problem-solving and general thinking and learning skills and dispositions generally beyond the context in which they are learnt (e.g., Mercer et al., 2004; Wegerif et al., 1999; Trickey & Topping, 2004).
Whereas in the neo-Vygotskian socio-cultural tradition technology is often conceptualised as a mediating means for cognition, from this more dialogic perspective technology is seen as a facilitator opening and shaping dialogic spaces that would not otherwise be there. A dialogic perspective on cognition does not render the networked perspective on learning obsolete because dialogues always occur within networks. The dialogic perspective reveals, however, that the question “how can networks be made more intelligent?” is misleading and should be replaced with the very different question “how can networks open up, expand, deepen and generally resource creative dialogic spaces of reflection?”
Bahktin’s dialogic principle of holding two or more voices together in tension without combining them into one thing characterises a type of creative non-identity. Bakhtin, some of whose own creative ideas sparked from dialogue with the ancient Greeks, sought to understand how voices from every age and culture could so fruitfully engage in dialogue with each other. He called the universal context of dialogue “great time”. Teaching thinking on the dialogic model stimulated by Bakhtin is about drawing students from narrow concerns to the more universal thinking of “great time” which is the extraordinary space where all possible voices can talk together. This space cannot be characterised in positive terms; it does not have a fixed content such as a set of universal rational laws and it is the negative space of “difference” or the “gap” between identities and voices in a dialogue. The non-identity of dialogue is without a voice of its own yet it is pregnant with every possible voice. To learn to think is to move on a dimension from identification with limited images and limited objectives towards the impossible goal of identification with the non-identity of the space of dialogue. Another way of putting this is that the direction of growth implied is towards becoming more open to learning from others and from otherness in general.
We argue that movement in the direction of dialogue as an end in itself lies behind the teaching and learning of that Higher Order Thinking described by Resnick (1987) as an important goal for education. However, this dialogic understanding of “thinking” is no longer the individual cognition of traditional cognitive psychology. Thinking now is seen as embodied and situated in real dialogues. To learn thinking is to be drawn out into the space of dialogue which is a space of creative tension between different perspectives. Teaching for Higher Order Thinking, that kind of thinking which we value and want to see more of, can thus be translated into opening, expanding, and deepening dialogic spaces.

A Dialogic Foundation for the Design of Educational Technology

On a dialogic account of thinking the main aim is not to replace false representations with true ones so much as to augment understanding with new perspectives. In the rationalist tradition, represented by the thinking as computation metaphor that still dominates much cognitive psychology, there is a strong understanding of the vertical development of thinking from context-bound thinking towards universality through abstraction but little acknowledgment of the horizontal dimension of how different kinds of thinking are embedded in different ways of being. In the socio-cultural tradition, thinking is seen as the use of cultural tools in a social context so there is a strong understanding of the horizontal dimension in awareness of the variety of different kinds of thinking but no effective way to account for verticality. A model of learning to think as appropriating cultural tools and participating in cultural practices offers no way to say which tools or which practices are better in general, only in relation to a particular task already shaped by a community. This issue of verticality is important for education, which is inevitably about values and directions as well as processes. The metaphor of teaching and learning thinking as drawing students into spaces of dialogue across difference offers a vertical direction for the development of thinking without losing a sense of the horizontal. The direction of travel from narrow and local identifications that block dialogue towards increasing openness and engagement in universal dialogue is different from rationalism as it does not presuppose any overarching universal logical structures. The only universal presupposed “dialogic space”, refers to the context of thinking rather than any specific content of thinking. It is also different from rationalism because the teaching of thinking, on this metaphor, does not just mean changing minds but also changing the world. If one side of dialogic space is transcendent and infinite, then the other side is embedded in the world. The task of teaching thinking by opening, deepening, and widening spaces of dialogue involves changing cultural practices and social structures.

Towards a Framework for the Design of Educational Technology that can Teach Thinking as Dialogue Across Difference

Converting the theoretical foundation for design argued for above into educational activities requires an intermediate framework for design consisting of flexible design principles, exemplars, and key questions to ask. Below we put forward a provisional framework for design based on (1) conceptual analysis of the components of an account of teaching and learning thinking understood as movement into dialogue across difference and (2) an assessment of what has worked in already tried and tested educational designs to promote creative dialogic thinking. Conceptually this model of teaching thinking assumes that thinking is limited by closed identities and monologic or systemic practices so the first aim must be to open dialogic spaces understood as spaces of internal freedom within the external constraints of a situation and the next aim is to improve the educational quality of these spaces drawing participants more completely into dialogue through deepening and widening these spaces.

Opening Dialogic Spaces

There are ways of using ICT in education which close down dialogic space and ways which open this up. Tutorial software used individually closes down dialogue when the same sort of questions and tasks given to a group will open up dialogic spaces within the curriculum. Simulations that encourage fast and furious engagement will close down dialogue when the same interfaces with a prompt for talking that interrupts the action will open up dialogic spaces (Wegerif et al., 2003). A singular affordance of new media technologies is the possibility of supporting new dialogic spaces anywhere and everywhere, from interactive blogs under exhibits in museums to texted exchanges between pupils in different classrooms. But the technological support alone does not make a dialogic space. One of the key findings from Wegerif’s research with Neil Mercer, Lyn Dawes, Karen Littleton, and others on collaborative learning around computers in classrooms is that, for effective shared thinking, it is not enough just to place people in groups but they need to be prepared for working together in groups beforehand (Wegerif & Dawes, 2004). Applying discourse ground rules such as asking open questions and listening with respect to others opens up a creative dialogic space.
As well as the Thinking Together approach described by Wegerif and Dawes, Philosophy for Children also seems effective as a method of teaching for engagement in dialogic thinking. In one EC-funded study, “Philosophy Hotel”, similar Philosophy for Children pedagogy in different classrooms in several European countries was extended successfully to Internet-mediated philosophy discussions (a study by Steve Williams and Richard Athlone described in Wegerif, 2007, p. 267). The same principle that effective shared thinking needs to be positively taught emerges from reviews of collaborative learning in online environments (De Laat, 2006, p. 163).

Widening Dialogic Spaces

Baker, Quignard, Lund, and Séjourné (2003) distinguish between deepening and broadening a space of debate: Students broaden their understanding of a space of debate when they are better acquainted with societal and epistemological points of view, their associated arguments and value systems; they deepen it when they are able to go deeper into argument chains, to elaborate upon the meaning of arguments, and to better understand the notions involved. While the idea of dialogic space is broader than that of a space of debate, since it is not concerned only with explicit argumentation, the distinction between broadening and deepening remains useful. Broadening or expanding means roughly increasing the degree of difference between perspectives in a dialogue while maintaining the dialogic relationship. Broadening can be done through the use of the Internet to engage in real dialogues about global issues. An illustration of this is Oxfam’s http://tv.oneworld.net/ site, where video stories from across the world are exchanged and discussed. Another example of pedagogical use of the potential of the Internet to support dialogue across difference can be seen in the development education site: http://www.throughothereyes.org.uk/
In practice this kind of resource may not support real dialogue unless used with a dialogic pedagogical approach, described above, that equips young people for questioning, listening to, and reflecting on the views of others. Broadening in the classroom can be done through structured web-quest-type activities where an issue is posed and learners are sent to different web-sites to explore it and to question the people behind different viewpoints.

Deepen Dialogic Space

Deepening refers to increasing the degree of reflection on assumptions and grounds. With the right pedagogy the broadening potential of Internet dialogues also becomes a deepening as students are led to reflect on the assumptions that they carry with them into dialogues. Talk in face-to-face dialogues exists only momentarily and only for those immediately present. Technologies that support drawing and writing can thus be thought of as a way of deepening dialogues, by turning transitory talk and thoughts into external objects that are available to learners for discussion and shared reflection (Goody, 1977). Computer documents can offer a kind of halfway stage between the evanescence of talk and the permanence of written texts. Harry McMahon and Bill O’Neill, the originators of Bubble Dialogue software, use the term “slow-throwness” to refer to the way that their tool can externalise the thoughts and feelings of the participants and also support reflection and the possibility of returning and retrospectively changing dialogues (McMahon & O’Neill, 1993; BubbleDialogueII, developed by Wegerif and Barrett, is available free from http://www.dialogbox.org.uk/intro.htm). Often deepening follows from widening where exposure to other ways of seeing things can lead one to question one’s own framing assumptions. In this sense deepening is a form of “deconstruction” insofar as this means consciously exploring the key distinctions that frame constructions of meaning in order to become aware of how things might be otherwise. A specific form of deepening is to reflect on the process of dialogue and shared enquiry in order to become more aware of it and to refine it. Awareness tools to support collaborative learning online showing who is talking to whom and how much and what sort of things they are saying could serve this function. The most powerful example I have seen is the filming of groups of children talking together and then showing this back to them to support a discussion on what sort of behaviours are helpful and which are not.

Teach Content Through Induction into Fields of Dialogue

Interactivity makes it easy for software to simulate multiple points of view in a dialogue thus allowing learners to be inducted into a field of dialogue rather than into fixed “truths”. Any content can be taught through engagement in dialogue between alternative points of view. In this way the student learns not only the current consensus view on a topic but also how to justify it and how to question it and so is inducted into knowledge as shared enquiry rather than as authoritative and final. The forum design whereby multiple voices speak on a topic and then a group of learners discuss what they think is easy to implement. What students learn from this is how to negotiate for themselves a position in a field of dialogue. The term “field of dialogue” here mediates between the completely open concept of dialogic space and the more circumscribed curriculum areas. A good example of a field of dialogue might be the range of views on global warming or on capital punishment.
From a dialogic perspective the Internet is not so much a “tool of tools” but a cacophony of voices offering countless opportunities for dialogic engagement with multiple perspectives on every topic. While these perspectives are mediated by technology, signs for the voices of the other, faces, voices, avatars, videos, and so on, are not best understood on the model of tools but as stand-ins for the face of the other or “epiphantic” signs that lead one to the voice of another person (Leimann, 2002). The issue for design is how to use these different ways of mediating the presence of the other to support dialogue across difference that issues in reflection and learning. Web quests offer one way of scaffolding dialogic encounters between voices. E-mail links between geographically distant groups are another. Dialogues via avatars in 3D virtual worlds are a further way (see Ligorio & Pugliese, 2004).

An Example of Broadening Dialogic Space

Computer-mediated dialogues generally expand the “space” of dialogue by spatialising time so that many can “talk” in parallel and their different voices can be represented by spatial differences in an interface. In web forums or e-mail in-boxes this different way of doing dialogue is represented in a kind of play-script with one utterance after another listed in a temporal sequence prefaced by the name of the participant. This linear list is a metaphor for the progression of moments in time, the line below being the utterance after the line above. Even this arrangement makes it easy to lose the context of the argument. The “dialogue maps” of more map-like graphical dialogue environments like Digalo are made up of boxes of different shapes and colours representing different types of contribution and links between them which can also be given a meaning. Digalo has mainly been used synchronously with boxes appearing and disappearing and being moved around and linked in real-time but the end result is not a temporal arrangement but a spatial arrangement (see Fig. 16.1).

Fig. 16.1 Illustration of a Digalo map using 6 Hats technique

Figure 16.1 illustrates the potential for spatial arrangements of ideas looking at the patterning of messages rather than the content of messages. This is a map created by a group of university students using Edward de Bono’s Six Hats technique to encourage them to look at an issue in a range of different ways. The dialogic process of exploring an issue through various perspectives, all of which are valid and none of which are ever simply “overcome” in a “synthesis,” is well supported by the spatial representation of Digalo and its flexibility. Moving shapes around on the map supports reflection on the relationships between different perspectives. The development of dialogic reasoning is often signaled through the expression of openness of other points of view, through changes of mind and through inclusion of multiple voices in one “utterance” (see Fig. 16.2). Fig. 16.2 A cluster of shapes around the emergence of a new perspective

Through combining a content analysis of the “maps” for the emergence of new perspectives with critical event recall we have explored the extent to which this tool affords creative reflection on multiple perspectives and so could be seen as a tool that supports that widening of dialogues (Wegerif et al., 2009).

ICT and Dialogue Between Media

Meaning can be explored using a variety of media. According to the dialogic across difference perspective I have outlined above, dialogues are not simply an exchange of words. They consist of a relationship between voices or perspectives motivating a flow of meaning. This flow of meaning is focused and articulated by signs and communications technologies but is not reducible to those signs or technologies. Exploring the dialogue between meanings in different modes has the potential to broaden dialogues, by giving access to new kinds of perspectives and to deepen dialogues, by encouraging one mode to reflect on another. For example asking students to reflect on musical representations of different arguments can give access to the emotions that are often implicit behind neutral seeming words in texts and so both broaden and deepen the dialogic space. This can be illustrated through a recent project in a school in the UK where the use of ICT was central. This was a creative workshop combining together music composition, dance movement and art-work using light to produce a response to an initial poem entitled “Light Shifts”. The multi-modal result, presented in a powerpoint, is a powerful expression of Fig. 16.3 Edited still from “Light Shifts” a multimodal powerpoint presentation (Cunliffe, 2008)

multi-media dialogue effectively evoking that “dialogic space” between and around different media that enables meaning to transgress and to transfer. Figure 16.3 gives an edited version still combining light and text but to this you have to add in imagination, movement, music, and voice.

Blogging as an Example of Induction into and Creation of Dialogic Space

The problem with neo-Vygotskian accounts of how we learn to think is that they focus on the tools within the dialogue rather than the space of dialogue itself. Some have argued in this neo-Vygotskian way, that writing provides a kind of cognitive technology for mediated thinking, especially through tools like tables and lists that make abstract formal thinking possible (e.g Goody, 1977). Walter Ong makes a different point when he describes how the initial custom of reading texts aloud in groups was gradually replaced by silent individual reading. This habit, combined with the sense of closure in printed texts as if thought could become a thing supported the development of a sense of a fixed inner self separate from the interplay of communal life. This was conceptualized as a new “inner space” from which individuals had the freedom to reflect critically on the culture around them (Ong, 1982). This kind of sense of an inner space of freedom that one carries around with one is the very model of the “autonomous self” that education systems still aim to produce (Biesta, 2006). Ong’s careful and persuasive case offers a model for relating technologies to the development of embodied higher order thinking. On the whole, in the contexts of its use, electronic text is more immediately dialogic and communal than print technology. Yet, as writing, it continues, unlike oral dialogue, to endure over time and so it has the potential to support the disembedding of ideas from their contingent contexts that Ong attributes to writing. If electronic writing does support the kind of “inner space” of reflection away from the contingencies of time and physical context that Ong refers to, then this inner space is no longer the inert individualized space generated by earlier writing and reading practices but a collective and dialogic “inner space”.
Ong’s account of the way in which communicative practices associated with literacy led to the creation and deepening of individual inner space is applicable to analyzing the impact of new communicative technologies, not as tools that are internalized, but as new dialogic spaces that become part of the lifeworld of participants. In a recent talk the educational ethnographer, David Barton, described how he had put photos of the hills near his home in the North of England on Flickr and received comments from other amateur photographers in Japan and Germany. After that he described how he saw the same hills differently, as if through the eyes of the Japanese and the German photographers he was in dialogue with. This story illustrates how internet mediated dialogue can expand a space of reflection that is both individual and collective, both situated and transcendent. In a similar way the practice of blogging, for instance, can be a participation in a process of collective reflection. Events seem different when they are seen not only through one’s own eyes but also through the eyes of the potential audience for one’s blog. One course in Exeter University is assessed entirely through mutually visible multimedia blogs in a facebook-like web 2.0 environment and this has proved effective in creating a motivating shared reflective space. The majority of students report that seeing the views of others helps them to think and reflect and create new ideas.

Discussion and Conclusion

Both as a real shift in the foundations of economic and social life and as a vision of the future, the idea of the emerging global knowledge age challenges traditional approaches to education. New individual and collective skills and dispositions are required for thriving in the knowledge age. These have been described in terms of skills of communication, collaboration and creativity. Neither cognitive psychology, based on the computer metaphor of mind, nor socio-cultural approaches based on the metaphor of thinking as the use of cultural tools, can adequately account for how to teach effectively for these knowledge age skills. Dialogic theory can offer education a different vision which is a both trajectory of identity (like some socio-cultural theory such as that of Lave and Wenger (1991)) and also, like more rationalist and cognitivist accounts of education, a vertical development of thinking, since the trajectory is movement into the space of dialogue itself. This trajectory of learning is characterized by leaving behind narrow attachments and identities and becoming more open to otherness, both the otherness of different voices and the otherness of new ideas. This dialogic verticality is different from the verticality of the rationalists because it is a movement from identity into difference. At the end of the journey there are no universal structures of reason, only uncertainty, multiplicity and possibility. What could be more important in the emerging global network society than learning how to live constructively and creatively in a situation where there are always multiple voices with no possibility of an overview or a final true answer to any problem? In this Chapter we unpacked this dialogic theoretical perspective to turn it into a foundation for the design of education with technology and we tentatively put forward a framework for educational design based on the conceptual implications of the theory and on examples of activities that seemed to have worked in promoting movement into dialogic space. The concepts of opening, deepening, widening and resourcing dialogic space were used to analyze different educational designs. Some guiding principles were provided, such as the value of teaching content through drawing students into fields of dialogue and the importance of combining the use of technology with face-to-face pedagogies that actively teach the skills and social ground rules required for engagement in dialogue across difference. Although it remains weak on the details this framework offers a new way of understanding the role of the internet in teaching thinking. As well as the external relationships of voices situated in dispersed places and times, dialogue, it is claimed, offers the potential for internal relationships between voices. In mediating multiple voices in dialogue with each other the internet should be understood on the model of this internal dialogic space more than on the model of an external structure. The signs of the internet are perhaps best understood as stand ins or proxies for the “face of the other” described by Levinas as a kind of sign that signifies not content but a context for meaning (Levinas, 1978, p. 158, 1989, p. 90). This context for meaning is dialogue with others and with otherness in general. Whilst the internet is not itself dialogic space it appears to make possible the partial external realization of what has always been the internal intuition of dialogue: the ideal of all voices from all cultures and all times in dialogue together. As well as being an effective response to the need for workers who can thrive in a global knowledge economy, teaching thinking with the internet, understood as opening, widening and deepening dialogic space, is a practical proposal for how education could participate in the creation of a more peaceful future.

References

Baker, M. J., Quignard, M., Lund, K., & Séjourné, A. (2003). Computer-supported collaborative learning in the space of debate. In B. Wasson, S. Ludvigsen & U. Hoppe (Eds.), Designing for change in networked learning environments: Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer Support for Collaborative Learning 2003 pp. 11–20. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Bakhtin, M. (1986). Speech genres and other late essays. Austin: University of Texas.
Bell, D. (1999). The coming of post-industrial society. New York: Basic Books.
Biesta, G. (2006). Beyond learning: Democratic education for a human future. Boulder CO: Paradigm Press.
Bloom, B. S. (Ed.) (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives: The classification of educational goals: Handbook I, cognitive domain. New York, Toronto: Longmans, Green.
Bruns, A. (2007). Beyond difference: Reconfiguring education for the User-Led Age. Paper presented at the ICE 3 (Ideas, Cyberspace, Education) conference at Ross Priory, Loch Lomond, Scotland, 21–23 March 2007. Accessed on 10th August 2009 from http://snurb.info/publications.
Castells, M. (2001). The internet galaxy: Reflections on the internet, business, and society. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cunliffe, L. (2008). A case study: How interdisciplinary teaching using information and communication technology and supported by a creative partner impacted on creativity in an extra-curricular school activity. International Journal of Education through Art, 4, 1.
De laat, M. (2006). Networked learning. Apeldoorn: Politie Academy.
Drucker, P. F. (1969, April 24). The knowledge society. New Society, 13(343), 629–631.
European Council (2000). Presidency conclusions of the council of the European Union. http://www.europarl.europa.eu/summits/lis1_en.htm.
Goody, J. (1977). The domestication of the savage mind. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.
Hobson, P. (2002). The cradle of thought: Exploring the origins of thinking. London: Macmillan.
Jacoby, A. (2007). The knowledge Society and global dynamics in education politics. European Educational Research Journal, 6(1), 39–45.
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate periperal participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Leimann, M. (2002). Toward semiotic dialogism: The role of sign mediation in the dialogical self. Theory and Psychology, 12(2), 221–235.
Leitch, S. (2006). Prosperity for all in the global economy world class skills. Final report of the Leitch Review of Skills. London: HMSO/HM Treasury.
Levin, H., & Rumberger, R. (1995). Education, work and employment in developed countries: Situation and future challenges. In J. Hallak, & F. Caillods (Eds.), Educational planning: The international dimension pp. 69–88. UNESCO Bureau of Education, International Institute for Educational Planning. London: Garland.
Lévinas, E. (1978). Autrement qu’être ou au-dela de l’essence. Paris: Livre de poche.
Lévinas, E. (1989). Substitution. Translated by A. Lingis. In S. Hand (Ed.), The levinas reader pp 88–127. Oxford: Blackwell.
Ligorio, M. B., & Pugliese, A. C. (2004). Self-positioning in a text-based environment. Identity: An International Journal of Theory and Research, 4(4), 337–353.
McMahon, H., & O’Neill., W. (1993). Computer-mediated zones of engagement in learning. In T. Duffy, J. Lowyk & D. Jonassen (Eds.), Designing environments for constructive learning pp.37–57. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Mercer, N., Dawes, R., Wegerif, R., & Sams, C. (2004). Reasoning as a scientist: Ways of helping children to use language to learn science. British Educational Research Journal, 30(3), 367–385.
Ong, W. J. (1982). Orality and literacy: The technologizing of the word. London: Methuen.
Quisumbing, L. R. (2005). Education for the world of work and citizenship: Towards sustainable future societies. Prospects: Quarterly Review of Comparative Education, 35(3), 289–301.
Resnick, L. (1987). Education and learning to think. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Tomasello, M., Carpenter, M., Call, J., Behne, T., & Moll, H. (2005). Understanding and sharing intentions: The origins of cultural cognition. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28(5), 691–735.
Trickey, S., & Topping, K. J. (2004). Philosophy for children: A systematic review. Research Papers in Education, 19(3), 365–380.
Trilling, B., & Hood, P. (2001). Learning, technology and education reform in the knowledge age, or ‘We’re Wired, Webbed and Windowed, Now What?’. In C. Paechter, R. Edwards, R. Harrison, & P. Twining, (Eds.), Learning, space and identity. London, UK: Paul Chapman Publishing & The Open University, Also at: http://www.wested.org/cs/we/view/rs/654.
UNESCO (2005). Towards Knowledge Societies: Unesco World Report.
[http://www.unesco.org/en/worldreport]
Wegerif, R. (2007). Dialogic, education and technology: Expanding the space of learning. New York, Berlin: Springer.
Wegerif, R., & Dawes, L. (2004). Thinking and learning with ICT: Raising achievement in primary classrooms,. London: Routledge.
Wegerif, R., Littleton, K., & Jones, A. (2003). Stand alone computers supporting learning dialogues in primary classrooms. International Journal of Educational Research, 39(8), 851–860.
Wegerif, R., McLaren, B. M., Chamrada, M., Scheuer, O., Mansour, N., & Mikšátko, J. (2009). Recognizing Creative Thinking in Graphical e-Discussions using Artificial Intelligence GraphMatching Techniques. a paper presented at the 8th International Conference on Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL-09), June 8–13, 2009, University of the Aegean, Rhodes, Greece.
Wegerif, R., Mercer, N., & Dawes, L. (1999). From social interaction to individual reasoning: An empirical investigation of a possible socio-cultural model of cognitive development. Learning and Instruction, 9(5), 493–516.
