Chapter 2
DIALOGIC
Opening a space

What is to be done, O Muslims? for I do not recognize myself.
I am neither Christian, nor Jew, nor Magian, nor Muslim.
I am not of the East, nor of the West, nor of the land, nor of the sea;
I am not of Nature’s mint, nor of the circling heaven.
I am not of earth, nor of water, nor of air, nor of fire;
I am not of the empyrean, nor of the dust, nor of existence, nor of entity.
I am not of India, nor of China, nor of Bulgaria, nor of Saqsin
I am not of the kingdom of ‘Iraqian, nor of the country of Khorasan
I am not of the this world, nor of the next, nor of Paradise, nor of Hell
I am not of Adam, nor of Eve, nor of Eden and Rizwan.
My place is the Placeless, my trace is the Traceless
        From Divan-i Shams by Mevlani Rumi (http://www.rumi.org.uk/)

This chapter unpacks some of the many meanings of the term dialogic and explores how different interpretations of dialogic relate to education with technology. In this chapter I prepare some essential theoretical ground for the development of a perspective linking the use of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning and the teaching of flexible thinking and learning skills.

My main aim in this book is to outline the new vision of education with technology that I think we need for the emerging network society. This vision can be distinguished from most other visions through the use of the term dialogic. In this first chapter I prepare the ground for the rest of the book by unpacking some of the implications of the term dialogic. Most of this chapter is therefore not directly about the use of technology in education but about theory. I hope that readers who are more interested in the application of technology in education will bear with me.

1 SOME VARIETIES OF DIALOGIC

The term dialogic is now widely used in articles and books about education, however, it is being used in a variety of different ways. When a reference is given for the use of the term dialogic this is most often to the work of Russian literary theorist and philosopher, Michael Bakhtin (1895–1975). I have found at least five different but interlinked ways of understanding dialogic in the literature, each of which can be traced to, or at least themed with, strands found in the writings of Bakhtin. All of these interpretations of dialogic have implications for research on learning and for visions of education.

1.1 Dialogic as ‘pertaining to dialogue’

Dialogic meaning simply ‘pertaining to dialogue’ is the default dictionary definition that is now proliferating in the literature. Bakhtin wrote that ‘if an answer does not give rise to a new question from itself, it falls out of the dialogue’ (Bakhtin, 1986, pp. 114, 168). This definition of dialogue, a definition that distinguishes it from social conversations that are not inquiries on the one hand or monologues on the other hand, can be usefully applied in education (e.g. Alexander, 2000, p. 520). However, the idea of dialogue as a shared inquiry, while useful, does not in itself do justice to the full depth of Bakhtin’s analysis of dialogic.
Dialogue as shared inquiry has been a method in education since at least the time of Socrates without anyone previously feeling the need to refer to this as ‘dialogic’. We are now seeing the use of the term ‘dialogic’ in contexts where other terms like ‘collaborative learning’ or ‘discussion’ or ‘social interaction’ or ‘community of inquiry’ were previously used without any new depth of meaning being added. This is unfortunate because it is a waste of a potentially very useful technical term. There are not many accounts of learning that do not include a role for dialogues, including that of Piaget, but if this makes them all ‘dialogic’ then ‘dialogic’ is no longer capable of distinguishing between them.
‘Pertaining to dialogue’ is the default everyday meaning of the term ‘dialogic’, it is the adjective form of the noun ‘dialogue’ in much the same way that ‘democratic’ is the adjective form of the noun ‘democracy’, but when dialogic is used with a reference to Bakhtin there is an implication that it is a technical term and in this case the reader is entitled to expect something more than a dictionary definition. The dictionary meaning of dialogue, for example, implies a contrast to monologue but Bakhtin developed his account of ‘dialogic’ out of a reading of Dostoevsky’s novels which, as the work of one author, do not qualify as dialogues in the ordinary language meaning of the term (Bakhtin, 1973). Bakhtin has much more to offer than the idea that dialogue is a ‘shared inquiry’. ‘Dialogic’, for Bakhtin, was not a reference to actual dialogues between people as an empirical fact and site of investigation, but it was rather a reference to his distinctive and original way of understanding the meaning of texts.

1.2 Dialogic texts as opposed to monologic texts

For Bakhtin texts, even books, are also ‘utterances’ which are part of dialogues. Far from being the single voice of a single author, texts, he claimed, contained traces of many voices often engaging in dialogues within the text itself. Bakhtin described several ways in which texts or utterances can be located on a dialogic to monologic continuum, for example he wrote that they can be more or less multi-voiced and they can be more or less ‘open to the other’. This account has already been applied to Computer Supported Collaborative Learning and converted into coding schemes to assess the degree of dialogicality of messages in electronic conferencing environments using factors like addressing others, incorporating content of other messages and locating knowledge claims as tentative hypotheses open to correction (e.g. Hui, 2005).
Bakhtin was familiar with the work of Martin Buber who is also a source of dialogic theory in education. Bakhtin’s description of texts and utterances relates to a contrast in types of orientation to the other first articulated by Buber who distinguished between an ‘I-thou’ orientation to the other in dialogue and an ‘I-it’ orientation (Buber, 1923/1979). He characterized the I-thou orientation as about listening and understanding while the I-it orientation objectifies the other and is ultimately about controlling the other. Buber’s contrast is echoed in Bakhtin’s account of the difference between the ‘authoritative’ voice that remains outside of my words and the ‘internally persuasive’ voice that enters inside them. Bakhtin’s account of the impact of what he called ‘the persuasive word’ is often quoted because it has obvious significance for education:
Such a word awakens new and independent words, organises masses of our words from within and does not remain in an isolated and static condition: it is not finite but open; in each of the new contents that dialogise it, this discourse is able to reveal ever new ways to mean. (Bakhtin, 1981, p. 343)
Wertsch (1991) refers to Bakhtin’s contrast between the ‘authoritative’ and the ‘persuasive’ word in his own book, Voices of the Mind, and he relates this to a theory of learning as appropriating the voices of others based on Bakhtin’s own account of how we appropriate the words of others by taking them into our own store of words, giving them our own accent and our own associations and resonances (Bakhtin, 1986, pp. 293–294). Wertsch’s synthesis of Vygotsky and Bakhtin into the idea of learning as the appropriation of social voices and social discourses has been influential in the field of Computer Supported Collaborative Learning. However, the philosophical frameworks of Bakhtin and Vygotsky are so different that this ‘synthesis’ is problematic (this is an issue which I address in detail in the next chapter, Chap. 3: Mediation).
Buber’s I-it to I-thou contrast and Bakhtin’s contrast between an authoritative voice and a persuasive voice relate to Paulo Freire’s contrast between a hierarchic style of educational delivery transmitting a fixed curriculum, which he calls monologic, and a more responsive dialogic method of education which respects the voices of the students (Freire, 1971). Freire associates monologic education with the maintenance of relations of oppression and dialogic education with liberation of the oppressed. Freire’s work has been inspirational for many, especially for teachers working with the poor and the underpriveliged. However, critics of Freire point out that his ‘dialogic’ method occurs within a Marxist framework in which the teacher is acting to raise the consciousness of the students collectively in a way that presupposes in advance what that consciousness will be consciousness of, i.e. their oppression and the need for collective action. It is because he knows in advance what will emerge from dialogic teaching and learning that Freire, like Vygotsky, offers a dialectic rather than a truly dialogic account of education (see Chap. 3 for an elaboration of this contrast).
Influenced by Bakhtin, Hubert Hermans, a psychologist interested in psychotherapy, proposed a model of the dialogical self by which he means the self as a polyphony of competing and cooperating voices (Hermans, 2004). Bakhtin is one of Hermans sources and his account of the coherence of the self is similar in many ways to Bakhtin’s account of the coherence of a novel by Doestoevsky, a coherence that emerges through and across the many voices that speak independently within each novel (Bakhtin, 1973). According to Hermans, the voices of a self are triggered by and rooted in different contexts and they can move across the boundary of the self, sometimes being experienced as the voices of others or things physically outside of the self. Hermans’ theory has been applied to Computer Supported Collaborative Learning in studies by Beatrice Ligorio and colleagues which suggest that identity issues are important to understanding how people negotiate and reach towards shared understandings in online environments (e.g. Ligorio and Pugliese, 2004).

1.3 Dialogic as an epistemological paradigm

While Bakhtin sometimes contrasts dialogic with monologic, at other times he implies that texts are always really dialogic and that all thought, including thought inside an individual head, is a dialogue between multiple voices. This suggests that one way to overcome the problem of distinguishing the dialogic from the monologic is to universalize dialogic and to understand apparent monologic as a kind of illusion that occurs within dialogic. This is the route that I think is being taken by those who interpret dialogic as an epistemological framework such as the Scandinavian communication theorists Ragnor Rommetveit and Per Linell.
Volosinov, a close collaborator with Bakhtin in the 1920s, wrote:
meaning is like an electric spark that occurs only when two different terminals are hooked together and further that: In essence meaning belongs to a word in its position between speakers; that is, meaning is realised only in the process of active, responsive, understanding. (Volosinov, 1929554/1986, pp. 102–103)
Similar claims are made by Bakhtin (e.g. 1986, p. 162). This implies that all meaning is really dialogic. Monologic is then presumably an illusion of power, by which I mean that it is not a reality but the impression that authoritative voices try to give that they are speaking a simple unquestionable truth that cannot be challenged. Bakhtin is said to support this universalizing of dialogic when he claims that all utterances are a response to a situation or to somebody else’s utterance and are addressed to somebody who is supposed to do something with them (Morson and Emerson, 1990, quoted by Linell, 2003). Rommetveit (1992) and Per Linell (1998, 2003) can therefore claim to be following Bakhtin when they claim that dialogism is ‘an epistemological framework’. To make their case they contrast their dialogic paradigm to a monologic paradigm through a number of assumptions, three which I have selected as being of central significance:
1. That any communicative act is interdependent with other acts, it responds to what has gone before and anticipates future responses.
2. That acts are similarly ‘in dialogue’ with other aspects of context such as cultural traditions and social setting.
3. That meaning does not exist ‘ready-made’ before dialogues but is constructed within dialogues.
These three points unpack the basic claim of Volosinov that meaning is never simply given but is always created out of the interaction between different voices and different perspectives, and is reinforced by Bakhtin’s point that meaning, for us, is always a response to a question (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 168). This implies the further claim that when people understand or ‘know’ something they do so dynamically in a communicative act that carves out one meaning from a field of competing possible meanings – a field of alternatives that does not exist ready-made but itself is generated by the dialogue. It follows that signs, even a hieroglyph on a temple wall, do not mean anything in themselves, their meaning is a product of an act of reading and that act of reading is always in some way ‘dialogic’ because the meaning read is an answer to the question or questions that we ask of the text as we read.
Linell and Rommetveit contrast their dialogical paradigm to the monological paradigm that they claim represents the mainstream in social science. The monological paradigm in science is said to seek the universal laws and structures underlying surface phenomena. The ideal motivating this endeavour is to produce a single logically coherent model independent of perspective. The monological paradigm is often accused of overlooking the fact that knowledge is never independent of social, historical and biological contexts that give it meaning. One aspect of the contextual background required to interpret knowledge claims is their position within conversations, including the long-term conversations of a culture. The dialogic claim from Bakhtin, picked up and developed by Linell and Rometveit, is that any utterance, even a scientific theory, is a link in a chain of communication (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 69). The ‘facts of nature’ for example, only arise as answers to the questions that we ask of nature and if we asked different questions we would ‘see’ different facts.
Dialogicality means not merely that participants in interactions respond to what other participants do, they respond in a way that takes into account how they think other people are going to respond to them. Rommetveit, quoting Barwise and Perry (1983), calls this circularity ‘atunement to the atunement of the other’ and points out firstly, that it influences most human behaviour and secondly, that it is impossible to understand the effects of this circularity using monological representations (Rommetveit, 1992). Monological models assume closed systems with regular and therefore discoverable relationships between inputs and outputs. If human behaviour has to be understood in much the same way as we interpret meaning in a continuing dialogue then, Rommetveit claims, monological models are inappropriate.
One of the implications of dialogic as an epistemological paradigm is that there can be no fixed or final meaning for utterances. This is because meanings emerge in the context of a dialogue which is always open so leaving the potential for a reassessment. Bakhtin emphasised this lack of finality, writing:
There is neither a first nor a last word and there are no limits to the dialogic context (it extends into the boundless past and the boundless future). (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 170)
Bakhtin’s point here has obvious implications for research on computer mediated dialogues. It implies that the effort expended by researchers to pin down the exact meaning of utterances and to code them accurately might be misguided. Bakhtin is not arguing here that validity and reliability do not exist but rather that they exist only within dialogues and in those dialogues they are always relative to a perspective. The insight that meaning only exists in dialogue leads him to propose an apparently holistic approach to research in social science, arguing that the meaning of utterances is not to be found in one utterance but only ‘in the chain of meaning, which in its totality is the only thing that can be real’ (Bakthin, 1986, p. 146). This methodological holism, however, is complicated by the fact that the chain of meaning is said to be open and without boundary, in other words it resists ever being grasped as a totality.
To illustrate this idea that meaning occurs only in an endless and open chain of meaning and to introduce the idea of a dialogic ontology in a seriously playful way, I will use an example taken from biblical scholarship. The opening words of St. John’s gospel, some of the most ‘authoritative’ and ‘final’ words in the Christian tradition, are ‘εν αρχη ηνο λογοσ’. This is traditionally translated into English by the resonant phrase: ‘In the beginning was the word’. However, λογοσ (or ‘logos’) is an enormously resonant word with many more potential translations than ‘word’. The interpretation of ‘logos’ led to a scandal in 1522 when the humanist scholar Erasmus, who had been charged by the church with the task of producing a definitive Latin version of the Bible, translated this opening line as: ‘In principio erat sermo’. Sermo could mean ‘talk’ as in a sermon, but it is also often translated as everyday talk or ‘conversation’. Like logos the ancient Greek word αρχη (arch) is also resonant with many possible meanings. One such is ‘head’ or ‘ruler’ but another, in the tradition of Platonic philosophy which St. John evokes through his choice of words, could be the ‘primary source’ or the ‘underlying principle’. This suggests yet another possible translation of εν αρχη ηνο λογοσ as ‘The underlying principle is conversation’. This was the big problem with Erasmus’s translation. While it was possible for the Church authorities to imagine God embodied (‘made flesh’) in the form of a word, a kind of thing, it was not possible for them to imagine God as a ‘conversation’. If Erasmus’s translation had been accepted the subsequent history of Christianity might have been quite different. What is particularly interesting to me is that the issues at stake in the theological dispute that Erasmus’s translation of the bible caused in 1522 are similar to the issues at stake today in education when we debate the relative merits of monological and dialogical perspectives. Can the ultimate context of meaning be assumed to take the form of an ‘identity’ such as a ‘word’ or formula – in the beginning was E=mc2 perhaps? – or is it to be thought of more on the model of an open-ended and multi-perspectival space of dialogue? Erasmus’s translation was not accepted but it might have been and it might be again 1 day. This illustrates the point that even the most foundational words in a culture, as well as the most ordinary words, shift their meanings at different points in an ongoing dialogue that has no obvious limits as to what may become relevant, nor any clear stopping conditions.
Some readers might now be thinking that, in a book on educational technology, bringing in Erasmus and St John’s gospel is a diversion too far. I understand that concern but would reply that this book is also about how we can promote creativity and flexible thinking skills. An important aspect of Bakhtin’s account of dialogicality is the idea developed by Bakhtin of ‘intertextuality’, or that texts always contain references to other texts and are read as a dialogue between texts. My interpretation of his notion of ‘great time’ is that, at a certain level, all texts are always in dialogue with all other texts. I am exemplifying this by illustrating that Erasmus’s sixteenth century translation of the Bible is still relevant to scientific concerns today. This radical intertextuality is, I will argue in later chapters, at the heart of creativity and flexible thinking and learning skills and so needs to be taken on board by educationalists if we are to be able to design for the development of these general skills.

1.4 Dialogic as a social ontology

Ontology is a word used in philosophy to refer to inquiry into the nature of ‘being’ or whatever it is that can be said to exist. In referring to dialogic as an epistemological framework, Per Linell is saying that dialogic is not so much about how the world really ‘is’ as about how we come to know about the world. However, dialogic as epistemology, on this model, often appears to assume an implicit ontology of subjects facing an objective world which these subjects come to know about through talking together. This is problematic since Bakhtin’s arguments can also be read as taking us beyond epistemology, or a concern with how we know things, towards ontology, or a claim about what is really there. In the human sphere, which he indicates by referring to the ‘world of meaning’, he is claiming that what is really there is never a single or fixed meaning but always a dialogue.
In the context of a reading of Dostoevsky, Bakhtin made it clear that he intended to question the philosophical principle of identity, at least as this applies to human beings:
Man is never coincident with himself. The equation of identity “A is A” is inapplicable to him. (Bakhtin, 1973, p. 48)
Sidorkin relates Bakhtin to Buber in asserting that the basis of being human (or human being) is not some kind of identity such as ‘a self’ in the face of ‘a world’ but the opening of dialogue (Sidorkin, 1999). The self, for Bakhtin, is defined through dialogue and is at its most authentic as the opening of a difference between perspectives. Social science, similarly, Bakhtin claims, does not aim at a reduction to identity but at an understanding of the other that preserves that otherness (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 169).
Sidorkin follows Bakhtin in limiting this ontological claim to a claim about the essence of being human. Markova also makes an ontological claim for dialogic, but like Sidorkin she also limits this by calling it a ‘social ontology’ and ‘an ontology of humanity’ (Markova, 2003, p. 90). Presumably she is implying that, while culture and language and subjects are dialogically constructed, stars and trees might really exist just as they are independently of any dialogue about them. This echoes a distinction made by Bakhtin in his notes where he writes that:

Meaning cannot (and does not wish to) change physical, material and other phenomena; it cannot act as a material force (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 165)
Bakhtin continues that he is happy about this because he points out that contextual meaning is more powerful than a material force since it can completely change the way in which material things are interpreted while leaving them, physically, exactly as they are (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 165). However, and perhaps inevitably, Bakhtin speaks with more than one voice on this point. In ‘The Problem of the Text’, Bakhtin argues that understanding a dialogue as a researcher implies participating in that dialogue as a ‘third voice’. The researcher’s perspective is a necessary part of the dialogue and the understanding produced is always dialogic. As a passing comment he compares this situation to the experimenter in the experimental system referring in brackets to quantum physics and claiming that the observer is always ‘a constituent part’ of the world (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 126). The reference to quantum physics is presumably a reference to the conclusions of Heisenberg and Schrodinger that the perspective of the observer does in fact impact on the material reality of what is observed (see Penrose, 1989, for a comprehensive discussion of these positions and the possible role of consciousness in precipitating ‘material reality’). Bakhtin gives another tantalizing hint when he introduces his idea of the ‘chronotope’ in novels which is the idea that different texts produce different configurations of space and time with a reference to Einstein and the claim that this use of ‘space’ and ‘time’ is partly metaphoric but not entirely (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 250). Theoretical physics was not Bakhtin’s specialist area and it is not my specialist area but he marked the possibility, at various points, that dialogic is not only a ‘human ontology’ but may be something more fundamental and universal.

2 FROM IDENTITY TO DIFFERENCE

To understand the ontological definition of dialogic, which is the basis of the theory of education with technology that I put forward in this book, it is necessary to first come to terms with the recent shift in some schools of thought from what could be called ‘identity thinking’ to what could be called ‘difference thinking’. This shift is often associated with post-modernism in general and with Jacques Derrida in particular (although the idea of ontological difference really originated with Heidegger). However, beyond philosophy, it could also be that the popularity of this new way of thinking relates to changing human practices associated with the historical shift towards a networked society which I outlined in the introduction. As I mentioned in the introduction, this shift is not only a change of intellectual fashion but reflects a changed experience of space and time brought about by new information and communications technology. The widespread interest in and reference to ‘post-modernism’ does not stem from many people being influenced by the difficult texts of philosophers such as Derrida but from the widespread feeling that our lived reality is different now from what it was and that we need to understand how and why it is different.
One way of understanding the essential nature of the shift is through the
idea of ‘identity thinking’. Heidegger claimed that the history of Western philosophy is dominated by the metaphor of ‘identity’ or the assumption, attributed to Aristotle, that a thing is what it is and not another thing (Aristotle, 350BCE/2006). While this assumption of identity appears to make sense when we are talking about objects in physical space it is unhelpful when we use it to refer to meaning. When things are just what they are – for example these black marks on the page or on the screen in front of you – then they have no meaning. It is only when they are also something else that they take on meaning. This problem leads to various reference theories of meaning that try to preserve identity thinking by describing signs as things that refer to other things, including in this category of the signified ‘thought things’ or concepts as well as material things or objects.
Derrida claims that reference theories of meaning are fundamentally muddled. He makes fun of the identity metaphor by playing with the letter ‘a’. By inserting it into the French word difference to make a new word ‘différance’ he gives it almost infinite but also indefinite meaning. If the letter ‘a’ was just what it was and not another thing then this kind of play with the multiple meanings of ‘a’ would not be possible. Influenced by Saussure, Derrida suggests that a better metaphor for looking at meaning than identity is the metaphor of ‘difference’. Signs, on Saussure’s theory, mean not by what they are so much as by the difference that they make within the system of differences which is a language. The ‘a’ inserted into the word ‘difference’ is able to mean something because it is not ‘e’ – although physically ‘a’ and ‘e’ are very similar: turn them upside down and invert them and they are almost the same.

Fig. 2.1. The ‘difference’ between ‘a’ and ‘e’

One thing that is being made clear by this play with letters is that ‘a’
cannot be made to mean anything except in contrast to other letters such as ‘e’. I believe that this is a similar claim to the claim from Bakhtin that an utterance in a dialogue does not mean on its own but only in relation to other utterances that it responds to or evokes.
Derrida, however, does not accept Saussure’s ‘structuralist’ account of meaning as a property of relations of differences within a system, he claims that the system of differences has no boundary. This simple step is important and has implications that many find challenging. As with Bakhtin’s claim that the dialogue has no ‘last word’, the claim that language (or the system within which differences mean) has no boundary implies that there can be no fixed meaning of a term (any significant difference) because there is always the possibility of a new interpretation. It also implies that differences that mean cannot be thought of only as the differentiation of a prior field of possibilities but rather must be thought of as precipitating or constructing their own context. Making meaning through an infinite process of differencing that has no limits is not the same as differentiating a limited field. This is what distinguishes the new difference thinking of Derrida and other thinkers often called ‘post-modern’ from the kind of difference thinking found already in Hegel’s dialectic. Differences are also the basis of meaning and thought in Hegel’s system but they are a differentiation of an initial simple ‘Being’ and this process of differentiation of Being from itself leads ultimately to a return to ‘Being’ but this time as a more complexly internally differentiated whole. For Derrida there is no ‘Being’ or even being – there is only différance.

3 BACK TO BAKHTIN

Bakhtin points out several times in different texts that the aim of dialogue is not to reach intersubjective agreement in the sense of simple coincidence of perspectives because such coincidence would bring an end the flow meaning (e.g. Bakhtin, 1986, p. 162). Like Volosinov’s metaphor of meaning as an electric spark that requires two poles to ignite, this suggests the idea of dialogic as a difference or gap or opening without which there would be no meaning.
The idea that meaning implies an opening of difference connects Bakhtin’s dialogic to the theme of ‘difference thinking’ that I have tried to articulate above. Bakhtin tends to locate this opening in the difference between two voices or texts in a dialogue (e.g. Bakhtin, 1978, p. 162). This is true at the level of experience but Bakhtin also argues that voices and texts are constructed within and through dialogue, which implies that the opening of dialogue is also in some way to be understood as an underlying principle such that a difference between perspectives has ‘always already’ opened a potentiality for meaning even before we start to talk or to think.
This analysis of dialogic as an opening of a space of meaning connects Bakhtin to Derrida who, in his seminal essay ‘La Différance’ argues that meaning is a product of an, always prior, act of making a difference that includes the differing of space and the deferring of time (Derrida, 1973, 1968). Derrida presents his understanding of difference through a critical development of ideas from Heidegger. In Heidegger’s 1957 lecture on ‘Identity and Difference’ (Heidegger, 1969) he interrogates what he calls the ‘A = A’ principle of identity thinking and finds the origin of meaning in an unmediated ‘ontological difference’, which he refers to as the difference between Being and beings. Heidegger’s account of this ontological difference is also an account of how ‘mankind’ and Being belong together in what he calls ‘the event of appropriation’ (ereignis) which he describes as a movement of ‘overwhelming’ and ‘arrival’ and as the circling (his word is ‘ineinander’) of the Being of beings and the beings of Being around the invisible unmediated difference between them (Heidegger, 1969, p. 69).
I have to admit that I am not sure that I understand what Heidegger is trying to say by this concept of ereignis. One way that I have found to make Heidegger’s distinction between beings and Being useful for me is through Merleau-Ponty’s more visual account of the difference between figure and ground. This is the more simple to grasp idea that, that things or objects always stand-out from and are defined against an implicit background. Merleau-Ponty, whose later work was strongly influenced by Heidegger, offers an account of perception that shares some of the structure of Heidegger’s account of ‘ereignis’. When a person stands up within a landscape, a horizon instantly forms around them stretching away in every direction as far as the eye can see (perhaps Heidegger’s concept of ‘arrival’) but at the same time as the person’s gaze precipitates this horizon they also experience themselves placed as an object within their horizon as if the gaze of the horizon was looking at them and locating them within it (a possible picture of Heidegger’s concept of ‘overwhelming’). Merleau-Ponty refers to these two sides, the looking out and the looking in, together as a ‘chiasm’. ‘Chiasm’ is a term now increasingly taken up by dialogical theorists in psychology and education (e.g. Shotter, 2001). This word is borrowed from grammar where it refers to the reversability of the subject and the object in a sentence and is used by MerleauPonty to refer to the mutual envelopment (a translation of Heidegger’s term ‘ineinander’) and reversibility between two total perspectives on the world around an ‘unbridgeable gap’ or ‘hinge’ which is also, he writes, an opening or ‘déhiscence’ of meaning (Merleau-Ponty, 1964, pp. 194, 201: 1968, pp. 148, 153).
Bakhtin, in his notes on ‘Methodology for the Human Sciences’ appears to reach towards a similar view to that of Merleau-Ponty’s chiasm writing:
Thought about the world and thought in the world. Thought striving to
embrace the world and thought experiencing itself in the world (as part
of it). An event in the world and participation in it. The world as an
event (and not as existence in ready-made form). (Bakhtin, 1986, p. 162)
By ‘event’ Bakhtin means something like the act of making a difference. He may be claiming here that the world does not exist until an act of making a difference separates a self (or perspective) from a world. In this passage Bakhtin comes out explicitly against the ontology of subjective selves in objective worlds trying to understand them through dialogues, which may be implicit in the epistemological interpretation of dialogic referred to earlier. Here he is suggesting that our sense of the world and of our own perspective within it are mutually constructed out of a kind of dialogue. This passage reinforces the interpretation that Bakhtin’s dialogic joins Heidegger’s ereignis, Derrida’s différance and Merleau-Ponty’s chiasm as a variation on the theme of ontological difference. Of course there are many important differences between these accounts and if I was writing a book of academic philosophy I would have to try to unpack these. However, this is a book about the philosophical foundations of Educational Technology in the Twenty-First Century and for that the main point of these theories lies in two assertions: firstly that meanings are not things, they are not reducible to knowledge objects or ‘cognitive artefacts’, and they should not be thought of in terms of identity; secondly that meaning arises out of and depends upon an original ‘creative difference’ or ‘opening’ that could be thought of as the opening of dialogue.
This discussion of ontology is also relevant to understanding educational technology in the context of the Internet because if we remain with the monologic default assumption of an objective physical world made up of definable separate identities causally related to each other, then the meaning space opened up by the Internet cannot be understood. Only a dialogic ontology of difference, in which an infinite space of potential meaning is opened up by voices in dialogue, can make sense of the virtual space of meaning opened up by the Internet and so can understand how the phenomenon of an Internet is possible in the first place.

4 EDUCATION INTO DIALOGUE

It is common now to write about learning in terms of trajectories of identity (e.g. Wenger, 1999, 2005). These accounts are often intended to replace more rationalist accounts such as that of Piaget which refer to a movement of ‘decontextualisation’ involving abstraction and generalization. Piaget’s metaphors all suggest upward movement. In replacing such accounts, this dimensionality often seems to have been lost. The idea of shifting in identity can seem rather horizontal, like wandering over a flat landscape, without much sense of there being anywhere more worth getting to than anywhere else. Accounts of changes in ‘core identity’ brought about by education are often fascinating but it is not always clear in what way, if any, the end result, the ‘educated’ identity, is really different in quality from the starting identity. Basil Bernstein, for example, provides an account of teaching as a ‘vertical discourse’ as opposed to the ‘horizontal discourse’ of everyday knowledge but he does so, at least in his later work, in a way which is careful not to value the one over the other but to see both as situated social constructions (Bourne, 2003). The dialogic ontology I introduced earlier implies, however, a real-dimensional change in learning which parallels the idea of the vertical ascent and de-contextualisation of knowledge, but in a new and almost an inverted kind of way. A rationalist view of development has to posit real cognitive structures as the end point of the de-contextualisation of knowledge. The dialogic view I am proposing begins with the idea of the other as ungraspable and suggests a movement of the letting go of identity in order to understand the other and, at the same time, the self.
This implies the paradoxical aim of identifying with non-identity expressed by Merleau-Ponty in the phrase ‘what there is to be grasped is a dispossession’ (1964, p. 191). I give some very concrete illustrations of what this might mean in educational terms in Chap. 4. This same insight is expressed well by the poet Keat’s idea of ‘negative capability’. Appropriately enough, in the context of a discussion of dialogic, Keat’s proposed this idea in a letter to his brother which described an insight that had emerged in a conversation earlier that same day:
I had not a dispute but a disquisition, with Dilke on various subjects; several things dove-tailed in my mind, and at once it struck me what quality went to form a Man of Achievement, especially in Literature, and which Shakespeare possessed so enormously – I mean Negative Capability, that is, when a man is capable of being in uncertainties, mysteries, doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact and reason’ (Sunday 21 Dec. 1817 Hampstead. http://englishhistory.net/keats/letters.html) The idea expressed by Keats here of an identity built on ‘identifying with
non-identity’ is an oxymoron. While the term oxymoron is often used to indicate a simple contradiction, as in ‘an argument that goes nowhere’, I prefer the use of oxymoron in literary criticism to refer to a conjunction of words which, at first view, seem to be contradictory or incongruous, but whose surprising juxtaposition may express a deeper truth. In this case the deeper truth is a trajectory of identity development that includes a dimension of depth towards negative capability, not an active grasping at truth but a capacity for dispossession which issues in creativity.

5 DIALOGIC EDUCATION AND TECHNOLOGY

Each of the five ways of understanding dialogic which I outlined above have implications for education and the role of technology in education.
1. Dialogic defined as pertaining to empirical dialogues suggests the promotion of dialogue as chains of questions in classrooms both through teacher–pupil dialogues (Alexander, 2004) and through establishing communities of inquiry (Wells, 1999; Lipman, 2003).
2. Dialogic understood as being about the open and polyphonic properties of texts and utterances brings in the need for intertextuality in classrooms (Maybin, 1999; Kozulin, 1996) and the appropriation of social discourses as a goal in education (Hicks, 1996; Wertsch, 1998; Koschmann, 1999). Diane Hui’s work shows how the ‘dialogic’ property of utterances, dialogic in the sense of being open and responsive to the other, predicts sustainability and success in online learning communities (Hui, 2005). Beatrice Ligorio applies Herman’s account of the dialogic self to explore how dialogic self-formation and play is part of online learning (Ligorio and Pugliese, 2004).
3. Dialogic as an epistemological framework supports an account of education as the discursive construction of shared knowledge (Bereiter and Scardamalia, 1989; Mercer, 1995).
The first three interpretations of dialogic, while perfectly valid, are easily co-opted into an understanding of education as about the construction of an identity of some kind. This is a shame because it fails to make use of the more challenging and radical implications of Bakhtin’s version of dialogic. None of these approaches actually require therefore the specialist technical term status for dialogic implied by a reference to Bakhtin.
In contrast to the other understandings of dialogic, dialogic taken to be an ontological principle, whether as the social ontology proposed by Sidorkin and Markova or in the more fundamental ontologies of Heidegger and Merleau-Ponty, has implications for practice that are intrinsically and distinctively ‘dialogic’ in the Bakhtinian sense. Only this ontological definition of dialogic is radical enough to resist becoming another method or tool in the default ‘modernist’ understanding of education as producing or constructing an object. The alternative vision offered by an ontological definition of dialogic applied to education is of moving learners into the space of dialogue. This is the direction of ‘negative capability’ suggested by Keats as the source of increased creativity. Heidegger similarly refers to this movement into the creative gap of difference when he writes that the most important thing to be learnt is learning itself and, to achieve this, teachers need to be even more teachable than their students (Heidegger, 1978, p. 380). In short, on the ontological dialogical model, dialogue is not primarily a means to the end of knowledge construction, or the acquisition of skills and identities, but is to be seen as an end in itself. The dialogic gap is what is most really there in the first place and also what is most to be learnt: this ontological dialogic is therefore the most important aim of education.
This might all sound very philosophical, and indeed it is, but it marks a profound shift in orientation towards teaching and learning with dialogue; a shift which has important implications for practice. So far Computer Supported Collaborative Learning has by and large used dialogue as a means to the end of knowledge construction and often called that use ‘dialogic’ – so what would it mean to be more truly dialogic? As I bring out in Chap. 4, the slogan ‘dialogue as an end in itself’ does not mean just talk for talk’s sake but indicates a challenging direction of development for individuals and society towards a greater capacity for creative thinking and a greater capacity for learning to learn intimately linked to an ethics of openness to the other.

Summary

This chapter unpacked some of the different interpretations given to the concept of dialogic drawn from the writings of Bakhtin and argued for the value of an ontological interpretation that relates Bakhtin’s dialogic to the more general ‘post-modern’ shift from ‘identity thinking’ to ‘difference thinking’. The main educational implication of this is the importance of promoting dialogue not only as a means to knowledge construction but also as an end in itself. This chapter has done some essential theoretical groundwork necessary to developing a framework that can link educational technology to the teaching of flexible thinking and learning skills such as creativity and learning to learn. In Chap. 3 I apply the understanding of dialogic developed here to a critique of socio-cultural theory in the form developed by Wertsch which is perhaps currently one of the most popular paradigms in design for Computer Supported Collaborative Learning.
